# Statement by Alliance for Aboriginal Youth in Mbantua

2 August 2024

**As a group of Aboriginal business owners, community leaders and
support workers with direct daily experience in supporting Aboriginal
children and young people in Mbantua we call for local Aboriginal
organisations to be empowered to lead and facilitate fundamental change
in the delivery of services and support for Aboriginal children ad young
people in Mbantua/Alice Springs.**

**Hundreds of young people with capabilities, capacity and an innate
wish for a better life are currently living in the Mbantua area without
hope or agency to change their lives, because of the failures of the
current approach to support them. Some have won attention through crime
and / or anti-social behaviour, but many others wait, without
expectation of changes required to allow them paths to a better future.
This dark reality is a stain on the future of our community and the
character of the nation.**

**We call on national leaders, journalists and public commentators to
stop vilifying our youth and stop pretending that more arrests will
solve this issue. We call for change in implementing support for
Aboriginal children and young people in Mbantua so that we can achieve
better outcomes, together.**

**We have seen goodness and potential in our young people, who too
frequently are misbehaving or committing crimes as a direct result of
hunger, homelessness, mental health, injustice, gaps in service
provision and other issues. We don't seek to excuse or justify crimes or
misbehaviour, but see no prospect of change unless the underlying causes
we see every day begin to be addressed.**

**We note there is extensive funding to coordinate the justice system,
but little or no coordination of the more than 150 services provided
government funding to support our young people. The very small number of
local Aboriginal organisations involved in supporting our young people
have formed the Alliance for Aboriginal Youth in Mbantua with community
leaders, frontline workers in provision of youth services and ally
organisations to provide new solutions and a vision for better service
delivery and outcomes for young Aboriginal people in our community.**

**We call on political representatives and political candidates,
Government departmental leaders, business and community leaders to
consider the following solutions, which are based on centuries of
collective experience in working with children and young people in
Mbantua.**

**Solutions:**

**Coordination and Gaps** -- while millions of dollars are spent each
year attempting to support out young people, too much is lost to cars,
executive salaries and administrative overhead costs -- with the failure
of the current approach clear to all. With millions being spent, we
should not still have children and young people hungry, homeless and/or
dressed in rags. But we do. We propose a series of meetings led by the
Alliance to identify further opportunities for collaboration, efficiency
and accountability. We want to see a channel to build awareness of key
issues that have been known by frontline workers and community members
for years but ignored in developing policies and solutions. We want to
help and we want to be heard. It is up to Governments to demonstrate how
they will respond -- or whether they will continue to waste millions of
dollars on failed interventions.

**More opportunities for young people to work** -- there are limited
opportunities to work, especially for young people involved in the
justice system. Alliance members are going to apply for permission to
accept young Aboriginal offenders into employment and / or training
roles, expanding the range of diversion opportunities available,
strengthening support in the transition from the justice system to the
community. Diversion program funding should be made available to local
Aboriginal organisations to expand placement opportunities.

**New Voice:** we have concerns about the lack of transparency in
operation of local youth justice facilities; a lack of controls on the
use of force including dogs to contain young people; alleged
overcrowding in watchhouses; and a conflict of interest in Northern
Territory Families controlling care and also incarceration of young
people. We seek increased Aboriginal representation throughout the
justice system, and greater transparency and collaboration between
actors in the justice system and the Alliance.

**Justice collaboration:** we propose an event involving judges, lawyers
and court officials, where Alliance members can present information on
their activities and capabilities. We recognise the need for the courts
to understand the services for diversion and rehabilitation available
from local Indigenous businesses and community members.

**Role models:** we recognise the importance of role models in building
esteem, hope and pathways to self-development and employment for our
young people. We seek to connect young people and funding opportunities
with existing programs which demonstrate the strengths and value of role
models and mentors.

**Collaboration:** despite millions of dollars being spent on service
providers in Mbantua alone, hundreds of young people are still without
enough food, housing or essential services. We call for improved
coordination and accountability, empowering local Aboriginal
organisations to lead change. We call for a recognition that existing
approaches are not working and changes must be made.

**Domestic Violence** -- we recognise that domestic violence is
anecdotally reported to be an increasing issue in the relationships of
teenagers and young people, and this issue has been highlighted by the
courts. We propose a training program to train Alliance members in how
to deliver a culturally-relevant version of the Love Bites program.

**Money issues** -- many young people have poor financial literacy and
many do not know how to access financial support currently available to
them, such as centrelink payments. We propose a training program to
train Alliance members in how to deliver a culturally-relevant personal
financial management program

**Education** -- we propose new approaches to engagement in education
based on further work with young people and Aboriginal-led pilot
programs, which could include night school options and piloting a larger
pool of Aboriginal tutors. We need resourcing to implement new pilots
based on insights from young people.

**More information:**

Kristy Bloomfield:

Director, Oonchiumpa Consultancy Services

<kristy.bloomfield@oonchiumpa.com.au>
